Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Nicole Rust. She's professor
of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, and today
we're talking about her book, Elusive Cures Why Neuroscience
Hasn't solved Brain Disorders and How We Can Change
that. So, Nicole, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Oh, Ricardo, thank you so much for having me.
It's a pleasure to be here.
OK, so first of all, what motivated you to
write this book?
So I've been a brain researcher for decades now,
and I was hearing increasing calls about the disconnection
between the sorts of things that brain researchers like
myself had been discovering and the end goals that
we need to achieve for society, which include, but
are not limited to. TREATMENTS and cures for brain
and mental disorders of all types, and what really
troubled me is I couldn't spell out how we're
going to reach those end goals, right, despite the
fact that I have been a brain researcher for
decades. And so for me, part of elusive cures
was really A personal journey to try to puzzle
these things out, but I also reasoned that if
I don't have a really clear picture of this
through line in my own head, others probably don't
as well. And so that's really why it became
a book project as opposed to just a personal
kind of exploration for me.
Right. And I mean, uh, if I read your
book correctly, it seems that there's a a disconnect
between papers published in neuroscience and the development of
new drugs. Why is there such a disconnect?
Yeah, so I think the first thing to emphasize
is that it's not that nothing has been happening.
So things have been happening. We've had game changing
drugs for certain classes of disorders, including things like
migraine headaches and even postpartum depression, but there are
certain classes of disorders that really have proven to
be somewhat formidable in terms of our attempts to
understand and treat them. And so these include the
neurodegenerative conditions, so things like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease,
or neuropsychiatric conditions which can include depression, anxiety, and
psychosis, and then the neurodevelopmental conditions which include things
like autism spectrum disorder as well as forms of
intellectual disability. So these are classes of conditions where
we have a hard time really understanding what's happening
in the brain, for example, when someone falls into
a bout of psychosis or a depressive episode, and
moreover, how do we intervene with that, right? So
when someone wants to shift the brain from a
one state into What they might consider a more
healthy state, then how do we go about doing
that? Those are, those are the just so the
causes really of these disorders is what we've had
a hard time puzzling out. I think that's really
what it boils down to for these conditions.
But to develop these drugs, is it enough to
understand the brain and how it works?
So that's an important question. Um, LET'S, let's begin
by, you know, just, uh, acknowledging that drugs are
not always the best form of treatment for every
type of disorder. So for example, if someone has
a severed spinal cord, right, if you want to
treat their paralysis, a drug is probably not the
right type of treatment. Uh, BUT under the assumption
that you do want to treat a condition with
a drug like that is in fact the right
way to go about it, then the question is
how do you go about finding it? Um. So
certainly I think if if the brain is the
target of a drug, understanding the brain is probably
the most important thing you would want to do.
At the same time, just understanding the brain by
itself probably misses two things. One is understanding the
body, right? So just an obvious example, if something
works really well in the brain, but it causes
liver toxicity, right, that's not going to, not going
to be a good drug. But also understanding the
impact on the mind and the behavior of an
individual. So another example, if a drug for insomnia
causes suicidal ideation, right, that's also a big problem.
So When I think about these things, I always
think about them in the framework of the brain
is really the only route to the mind, right?
But it's not always the case that um Understanding
what's happening in the brain is the most effective,
uh, or, um, best way to understand the mind.
So things like suicidal thoughts. We, we, we can't
look into a brain and understand, you know, we
don't know where those come from, we don't know
how those manifest. We can't, we can't look into
a brain and determine when one of those is
happening. So that's really, uh, I think a target
of the mind, really at this point, not the
brain.
And so, I mean, it's not just a matter
of Understanding the brain, but how we go about
doing it because there are different frameworks in neuroscience.
I've covered different ones on the show and in
the book you talk about, yeah, and in the
book you talk about what you call the grand
plan. So what is that and what is the
current, uh, dominant plan or kind of framework that
we can find in neuroscience?
Yeah, so, so the grand plan, it's kind of
a pithy phrase, right, but intentionally so. So when
I say grand plan, I mean it very affectionately
as a member of the brain research community, and
I think about the grand plan as this broad
strokes description about how any era's community of brain
researchers as a whole plans to get from wherever
they are to those end goals for society. And
those end goals come in many forms. So we,
in the case of brain research, we want to
understand the brain because we're curious. We want to
understand ourselves and how we work, and I think
that's an admirable goal in and of itself. But
it's not our only goal. We also want to
understand brains to do things like build things like
them. And so this is the whole neuro AI,
so trying to understand we are intelligent beings, and
so we want to understand how our own intelligence
works, so, so we can build things like it.
And then understanding the brain to treat brain and
mental disorders. So the question is, well, how, how
do we plan to do that? In the 1990s
there was tremendous enthusiasm around two particular technologies, and
that was DNA sequencing. So for the first time
we could actually sequence our genes and also noninvasive
measures of brain activity. So we could use functional
magnetic resonance imaging in order to look and see
what's happening inside our brain. And so in the
1990s there was tremendous optimism that if we just
sequence genes and image brains we'll figure out the
causes of brain and mental conditions, and once we
figure out those causes, that will lead us to
treatments. And so I would say that's the, that
was the grand plan of the 1990s. And unfortunately,
It hasn't panned out, so it's not that we
haven't learned a tremendous amount with those technologies. We
have unquestionably, but I think there's a lot less
enthusiasm now that if we just sequence genes and
image brains, the causes of these conditions will just
be forthcoming. So the new grand plan. IS currently
under reevaluation, and one of the big questions, one
of the big tasks I gave myself when I
was writing Elusive Cures is trying to reformulate what
our new grand plan is because the grand plan
of today, the emerging grand plan, is a lot
less obvious than it was back in the 1990s
where there's this kind of universal enthusiasm.
Mhm. Yes, uh, and I was talking about frameworks
just a minute ago. Uh, WHAT is the molecular
neuroscience framework and in the book you also talk
about three main problems with this framework and later
on you pick on those problems to, uh, tell
us the ways we can perhaps tackle them. So
tell us about that.
Yeah. So the again goes back to the 1990s.
I think that that was a real moment of
clarity for brain research and so that's really when
the molecular neuroscience framework first emerged. So the kind
of the broad strokes description of the brain and
that was emerging in that time. WAS the idea
that it all begins with genes. And so our
genes encode the information that then is translated and
transcribed in order to create our brain cells. Our
brain cells are then wired up into these circuits,
and it's the patterns of those activity that give
rise to all of our brain's functions, including. THINGS
like seeing and reading and attending and imagining, but
also it's dysfunctions. And then there's a single feedback
loop in that cycle by which our experiences with
the environment feedback to shape how our brains are
wired up, and that happens by changing the genes
that are expressed. And so this is how learning
works. So. To summarize that framework, researchers of the
era were really thinking about the brain as kind
of a big domino chain, I would say, and
the idea was that dysfunction could be attributed to
link to broken links somewhere in that chain. So
the goal of the arrow was to really find
the broken link in the chain and then target
it for effects. And so that broken link might
be a genetic mutation or a genetic variant that
an individual inherits. And so you might want to
target that with a drug or a form of
gene therapy. It also might be a form of
aberrant brain activity that you could go in and
target maybe with an invasive or noninvasive brain stimulation.
So that was the 1990s era. And there were
really 3 problems it turned out to thinking about
the brain that way. The first is that this
emphasis on these feedforward dominoes really amounts to causes
that lead to effects, and what it ignores is
the brain is chock full of these feedback loops.
So both within the brain, so brain area A
sends information to B, B typically sends information back
again to A. So you have these big reciprocal
loops. But also an emphasis on how extensively we
do interact with our environment and how extensively that
really shapes how our brains are wired up at
all levels. And In a system like that, you
have causes that lead to effects that then feed
back on themselves as causes, and that's a completely
different type of system. And when it goes awry,
it need not be because there's a broken domino
in a chain. In fact, that's probably, that's more
often the wrong way to think about it. So
we know a lot about systems like these because
they include things like the weather and ecosystems and
nuclear reactors. These are what are called complex dynamical
systems, and one of the principles of these systems
is that they are notoriously hard to shift from
one state to another in a predictable way. And
that's because any intervention you do in a system
like these leads to these big, because of these
big feedback loops, you get these big reverberations, and
that's really what treatments amount to. So treatments amount
to a form of control over a system, right?
You're trying to shift it from an unhealthy to
a more healthy state. And so that really highlights
the formidable challenge that we're up against in our
quest to understand what causes brain and mental conditions
and also develop treatments, right? It's really this, this
really complicated problem that we have to solve. But
for the first time in history we're finally starting
to tackle it, yeah. So the three big problems
that you mentioned, one is ignoring the feedback loops
really put us on the search for the wrong
types of causes when it comes to these conditions.
Also, Oversimplifying the problem led to this, this exquisite
targeting of these broken links in a chain, and
that can cause reverberations in the system, so side
effects of drugs that are somewhat unpredictable if you
don't really embrace the complexity. And then the third.
The third issue with the molecular neuroscience framework as
it was formulated in the 1990s is that it
really just even by its founders, it didn't have
a good description of how brain activity gives rise
to brain function, so things like think. And, and,
and the mind really and also behavior and so
those were the 33 things I think we really
need to fill in to extend beyond this 1990s
way of thinking about the brain, the molecular neuroscience
framework, in order to be more impactful as brain
researchers.
So what should replace then the molecular neuroscience framework?
Uh uh, YOU refer to the brain as a
complex systems, uh, a complex system, so should it
be complex systems theory or within complex systems dynamical
systems theory or what
exactly? Yeah, I think, I think, uh, one, you
know, another characteristic of these systems is that they're
really hard to intuit through. And so more so,
you know, domino chains, even if they're really, really
elaborate and there are many, many higher, many, many
stages, you still can kind of puzzle through them
often. In the case of these systems where you
have these big feedback loops, it becomes a system
that's really hard to puzzle through. So I would
argue that we definitely need more emphasis on formulating
explicit computational mathematical computer models of the system. And
those are models that incorporate, you know, these big
feedback loops. So yes, very much we're in the,
in the world of dynamical systems and complex systems,
appreciating, you know, their emergent surprising properties that are
often hard to predict from just understanding their parts
in isolation. It's not, it's not magical. It's just
that their parts interact in ways that are really
complicated with the big time lags, and so that's
why they're hard to predict. And the other key
component of the brain, and this is really what
makes the brain different than, say, the weather, we
have a lot to learn from the weather, I
think, but what makes the brain different from the
weather is it's an adaptive system. And so adaptation,
I think of as our brain's superpower, right? If
we put you in a new culture, you'll learn
the language. That's kind of a slow form of
adaptation, but our brains have all sorts of ways
to adapt to changing conditions like see a tiger
and it will trigger us to run. It kicks
our whole brain and body into a fight or
flight kind of response. And so we have all
these different ways to adapt, and a lot of
that adaptation relies on these big feedback loops, but
that means that the brain is really able to
control and manipulate itself effectively. And so I think
that that's a huge component of thinking about the
brain. So shifting away from thinking about the brain.
IS a domino chain of causes that lead to
effects and thinking about it as a complex adaptive
system where causes lead to effects and then feedback
to manipulate themselves again as causes.
And by the way, apart from what you mentioned
there of the importance of going beyond the domino
chain account of the brain or the domino chain
metaphor, one of the most dominant metaphors that I
guess we could say we still have in neuroscience
is the computer metaphor. So what are the limitations
with that kind of metaphor?
So the the computer metaphor, it's one I've worked
on a lot throughout my career, and so the,
the metaphor, it's really targeted at one of the
three big problems with the molecular neuroscience framework, and
that is filling the gap between brain activity and
brain function. And so when we think about the
brain as a computer, I think the most dominant
metaphor in brain research has been a serial computer.
So this is the idea that the brain is
taking information in through its senses. So you have
your visual system, your auditory system, your touch system.
And then it's processing that incoming information through a
series of modules. So vision would process the visual
information, hearing would be processed by the hearing system,
and then they would converge into other modules like
memory and attention and decision making. But the general
idea is that of the brain as the serial
computer metaphor is that you have these different modules
and they each do a job and then they
pass the answer on to the next module and
then your brain decides ultimately what to do. So
that's the brain as the computer metaphor and it's
been very Instructive for us to try to figure
out how certain things work like how is it
that the light patterns falling on our eye, which
are a little bit like pixels on a computer
screen, how are those transformed into a percept of
the identity of the objects that you're looking at
or the equivalent for the auditory system or how
do we remember the things that we see, those
sorts of questions. The issue with that metaphor ultimately
is that if you think through the brain as
computing things, like computing the labels of objects in
a picture or something. It's hard to see how
that metaphor jumps to a lot of the conditions
that that happen, a lot of ways that the
brain goes awry. So things like insomnia, that doesn't
really seem like a deficit in computation or anorexia
or epilepsy, all of these issues don't feel like
deficits in computation. They really feel like deficits in
something like the brain has become uncalibrated or imbalanced,
and it's really hard to link that metaphor of
the brain as a computer with ideas about dysfunction,
right? It's that that link, I think, isn't obvious
or clear. Mhm.
In the book you explore different kinds of brain-related
conditions and I would like to go through some
illustrative examples like psychosis, depression, and schizophrenia. But just
before we get into that, how are brain drugs
developed? I mean, what are the steps that scientists,
researchers, and drug developers take in the development of
these kinds of drugs?
It can happen in a few different ways, and
there are, and I'll contrast two of them. One
is the idealized way. And so this is when
a big discovery about the brain leads to a
novel treatment that we've never had before, right? And
when that happens, that's epic, and that's really what
that's often what's called the bench to bedside story.
So the idea is that there's a discovery at
the research bench that then leads to a new
treatment that we can deploy clinically. And I'd be
happy to walk through an example of exactly how
that happens when it happens. So that's one way.
And then there's another way that this happens, and
that is more serendipitously. Uh, WHERE researchers kind of
stumble on one thing, often while looking for another,
and it turns out that the second way is
how most of our therapies to treat brain and
mental disorders have been developed. Um, SO, and, and
they're, they're, they're, they're still important, and when I
think about this, I just think about all hands
on deck. People are suffering. It doesn't matter how
we get to this endpoint, we just have to
get there. But I think when we're trying to
also troubleshoot, it's important to Um, recognize the reality
as opposed to an idealized narrative of how this
happens. But let's walk through the idealized way that
this happens, because these, it does happen, and when
it happens, it's, it's, it's just awe inspiring and
epic. And so I can walk through a drug
called Suvaexin. So Suvaexin is a drug that's designed
to treat insomnia. And it works through a pathway
called the orexin pathway. So erexins are a chemical
in the brain that helps brain cells communicate with
one another, and it's involved in sleep. Actually, it's
involved in wakefulness and sleep. And so the discovery
of erein dates back to investigations of dogs and
what causes a genetically inherited form of dog narcolepsy.
So these are dogs that like humans, in the
middle of the day, if they get overexcited, they
would fall asleep. And so while that is not
true of humans, human narcolepsy is not genetically inherited.
The idea was, well, if we study these dogs,
maybe we can understand what's causing narcolepsy. And so
researchers, this was an era before we had the
high throughput genetic sequencing we have today, and so
it took them a very long time. But they
finally arrived at this, this, the discovery that there
was this orexin receptor in the brain that was
mutated in the dog colony. Next, it was linked
to human narcolepsy. Now, in humans, like I said,
it's not genetically inherited. Rather, it is a form
of neurodegeneration, so probably a neuroimmune attack attack. So
the neurons that produce this chemical are degenerated in
individuals with narcolepsy. So once they had the information
from the dogs, they then could link it to
the humans, and the way that this works, it's
really fascinating. So at the time that researchers discovered
this, they knew that there were chemicals in the
brain that kind of make us go to sleep
like melatonin you've probably heard of, but they didn't
realize. ARE also chemicals in the brain that keep
us awake, and that's what aexin does. And so
if aexin binds to its receptor that keeps us
awake and so if that receptor is mutated and
it can't bind, then that's what was causing the
narcolepsy. And so this discovery set the pharmaceutical industry
off on this big hunt for compounds, drugs that
could block the binding of aexin to its receptor,
so it couldn't maintain this wakefulness with the idea
that maybe this is what's happening in some individuals
with insomnia. They just have too much binding and
so we need to block it from binding. And
so a number of different pharmaceutical companies were competing
to find these drugs. The drug was ultimately developed
by Merck. So Merck in the United States screened,
I think, 2 million compounds to find one that
would block the errein receptor in just the right
way. They even, once they screened it and found
one chemical compound they thought was the best, they
even refined it to make a better one. Then
they passed it through clinical trials. It took about
10 years for the pharmaceutical industry to go from
the discovery to the creation of Suvaexent as an
approved drug. So just as an overview, right, this
starts with decades of researchers discovering things about the
brain and this new chemical they didn't even realize
existed, linking that to human, a human brain disorder,
narcolepsy. And then the pharmaceutical industry developing things for
another 10 years at the cost of about a
billion dollars to create Superexcent. So the whole, you
know, bench to bedside arc, it's absolutely epic when
it happens, absolutely.
Mhm. Yeah, that is really, really fascinating. So tell
us now about some examples of conditions in the,
in your book. You go through several of them,
but tell us about some of the history behind
the development of treatments for conditions like psychosis and
depression.
Yeah, so psychosis is, is an interesting example of
how things happened a little bit differently. Um, SO,
Rewinds back to the 1940s, 1950s. This field hadn't
actually figured out that brain cells communicate via chemical
transmission. They were still working all of that out,
and that's when the first antipsychotic was discovered, and
the way it was discovered was not based on
information about how the brain works, but rather it
was a company in Europe who was developing antihistamines.
To alleviate allergies, and as many of us know,
if you've ever taken an antihistamine, it can make
you tired. So they found that one of their
antihistamines made people particularly tired. And so someone intuited,
you know, maybe this would actually help with someone
who is very agitated and psychotic. And so they
just gave it a try. And it was this
first patient. It was in the 1950s, and the
effects on this patient were almost immediate and calming.
And so this was an individual who was going
through a severe psychotic episode. In this era. We
didn't have a lot of good ways to treat
individuals who are going through extreme bouts of psychosis,
immediately calming. And so that was chloropromazine. Yeah. Fast
forward today, we now have, I think, 26 antipsychotics
in total. But they all work in the same
way as this first antipsychotic that was discovered serendipitously.
That is not to say that we haven't relied
on new discoveries about the brain in order to
create these new drugs we have. But it turns
out that these refinements into drugs, which are better
because often they have fewer side effects, for example,
they don't work in a different way than this
first serendipitously discovered drug, so they all bind to
the same. Types of receptors in the brain, they
bind with different affinities, and that's what can lead
to different, different, um different side effect profiles like
the new generation. Maybe they'll cause less weight gain,
for example, because they bind better to the right
receptors and not to the wrong ones. So that's
an example of refinement, and, and it's a that's
what a lot, about 70% of brain drug development
happens through refinement of this type. So it's not
a new drug that works in a new way,
but rather it's a drug that maybe works better
in the best cases, but it works in the
same way as an original drug.
Uh, IN the case of the depression, because I
mean, many people nowadays, at least the ones that
are diagnosed, suffer from depression. Uh, IT'S one of
the major causes of disability, morbidity in the world.
So what, what, what, how have treatments for depression
been developed?
Yeah, so depression is a is a mixed case
in these in this story about bench to bedside.
So the first antidepressants were completely serendipitous. So researchers
were doing clinical trials for the drug for the
lung infecting disease tuberculosis, and what they noticed is
that individuals during the clinical Trials were really happy.
There was a news article reporting that they were
dancing around and joyous, and so they realized that
it probably has some sort of mood uplifting capability,
and so they put it through clinical trials. So
that was a very serendipitously discovered drug and again
before we really understood much about what's happening in
the brain at all. On the other hand, there
are the class of, for example, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, SSRIs, that many individuals, these are a temporary
class of drugs. They include things like Prozac. Those
drugs were based on a Nobel Prize winning discovery
that when brain cells, which again they release chemicals
to communicate with one another, after they release their
chemicals, then they'll go through a process of kind
of scavenging them, so reuptaking them. And the SSRIs,
they block that reuptake in order to maintain those
chemicals in the, so the brain cells communicate a
little bit more strongly for a little bit longer.
So those are the SSRIs, and so that those
really did follow from a big discovery about the
brain that then led to a new, a new
type of therapy. So in that case, it's been,
it's been quite mixed. On the other hand, the
SSRIs, it's a huge class, right? And so there
was the first Prozac and then many other drugs,
and all those drugs again, they, they often work
pretty much the same way. So many refinements on
that on that first big discovery, but with different
side effect protofiles and importantly, Some of those drugs
within that class will work for some individuals but
not for others, and other drugs will work for
some individuals but not for others. So we still
don't have a really great understanding about how to
match individuals with antidepressants, and I know that that's
a big push in the psychiatric community right now,
and it's so important, right, to get that right.
And do you think that the kind of approach
to the brain you described earlier based on complex
systems theory could help us figure out how these
uh treatments for depression exactly work and how we
can improve them?
Absolutely, and this is something that's, that's really near
and dear to my heart. um, SO before writing
a list of cures, I used to study the
visual system and I used to study memory. After
zooming out, I decided where to dive back in,
and I decided to dive back in on research
and mood and depression myself. So this is something
very, very near and dear to my heart. Yeah,
one of, so let's just start with what we
know and what we don't. We understand how those
drugs are operating at the level of molecules as
I just described. They, they interact with these molecules,
they block the reuptake, but we really don't understand
how changes in the amount of these chemicals. Improves
mood or changes mood, right? So there's a big
gap there, and part of it is because is
that there's a lag between, so these drugs often
take weeks or even months to kick in, and
their chemical effects seem to happen pretty quickly in
the brain. And so one of the big questions,
so it can't just be that it's this increase
in chemicals in the brain that then is alleviating
mood, you know, alleviating depression. There's something else going
on there, and that's, that's one of the big
missing pieces. When I, as a researcher, look at,
look at what's going on, I note that we
still don't really understand how things like mood are
reflected in patterns of brain activity, and that's, that's
something we really need to understand to figure out
in order to bridge this gap between what's happening
in our molecules and what's happening in terms of
brain function. And mood, we need to figure out
how do the molecules change the patterns of activity
and then how do the patterns of brain activity
give rise to this experience that we have as
mood. And it turns out that mood is more
difficult to study than many other brain functions. And
so this is what I'm, I'm very excited and
committed to jumping in to try to help figure
out is how do we bridge that gap.
OK, so let me ask you about one more
condition before we, we move on to other topics.
Uh, HOW do we tend to approach schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia, yeah, schizophrenia has had, um. So many evolutions
in the way that researchers think about it. In
the late 1800s, early 1900s, there were researchers like
Eugen Bleuler, Eugen Bleuler, it's hard for me to
say that one, who coined the term schizophrenia, and
he was actually quite progressive if you go back
and read his work. So he was very adamant
that schizophrenia had biological causes. There's something happening in
the brain that's causing it. And that we should,
we should treat individuals with the condition in a
limited way, so they should definitely be part of
our communities, and we should, they should be hospitalized,
but only when needed, right? But and minimally so.
So we want to help them, but we also
want to help them as a community. Unfortunately, the
1900s then was peppered with some less progressive and
important ideas about schizophrenia, which included institutionalization in the
United States. We didn't have good treatments before the
discovery of the antipsychotics, and so patients were sometimes
subject to horrible treatments like lobotomy and other types
of things. And there was also an era in
which even after the antipsychotics were discovered, That there
were ideas that schizophrenia was a disorder that followed
from traumatic experiences during childhood. This was the idea
of the schizophrenogenic mother. So the idea that mothers
were a little bit too domineering and they were
the causes of their children's schizophrenia, and The idea
was that the treatment, the cure involved a form
of psychodynamic therapy that really tried to root out
these traumatic childhood experiences, and it was a therapy
to help individuals kind of recover. That idea, um,
It had had some, some, um, a lot of,
I guess, enthusiasm about it behind it for a
while and some research. That research was really debunked
in the 1970s and 1980s, and by the mid
1980s there was kind of universal appreciation that this
is, this is not, this is not about traumatic
childhood experiences and bad parenting. So today, the way
we think about schizophrenia is that it, it is
likely to be a genetically inherited partially neurodevelopmental disorder,
but not due to these traumatic childhood parenting experiences.
So the first piece of evidence that we have
is that if one identical twin has schizophrenia, the
chances of the other identical twin having it are
only 50%. But they are 50%, so that tells
us there's something probably genetic, there's something genetically inherited
about schizophrenia. These two share the same genes. They
share the same womb environments largely, right? And they
have a lot of shared experiences. But so that's
telling us that it's not all about genes. There's
something else going on. We also know that um
There's an increased incidence of schizophrenia when children are
in the womb during a traumatic period like a
famine, so that can cause an increased incidence of
schizophrenia. So that tells us there's probably something about
traumatic experiences, but more neurodevelopmental experiences, not, not necessarily
like psychological development. So we think about it as
some type of neurodevelopmental disorder. It's nobody really understands
exactly why it manifests for the first time in
late adolescence around 1718, 19, mid-20s. So that's still
a big mystery. And there are a number of
other big mysteries about not only the causes of
schizophrenia, but also how it manifests in the adult
brain. So that's kind of an evolution in how
we're thinking about it with emphasis that that we've,
I think, Gotten, we, we've gone full circle. I
think back to the early 1900s. Um, WE do
have some treatments that can help, but they don't
work for everyone. Uh, AND we still have a
lot of work to do in order to really
understand schizophrenia.
And by the way, I also wanted to ask
you about Alzheimer's. I mean, why has it been
so hard for us to have an understanding of
what causes it, how it develops, and also in
terms of developing treatments for Alzheimer's.
Yeah, yeah, Alzheimer's is a really tricky one, and
the answer ultimately I'm going to come to is
like we really don't know. I open my book
with a story, a very moving story about a
woman named Carol Jennings. So Carol Jennings was a
woman. She was in the UK and she was
convinced that her family had a genetically inherited form
of Alzheimer's disease during a time in which That
that was not thought to exist. Today we know
that there are kind of three classes of Alzheimer's.
There are, there's a form like Carol Jennings' family
has. It's very rare, but if you inherit certain
genes, it will lead to Alzheimer's later in life
with certainty, and that's the form of Carolle Jennings'
family. There's another pile of Alzheimer's in which if
you inherit certain genes, it increases the probability that
you'll, you'll develop Alzheimer's later in life, but it
does not insure it. And then there's another class
of Alzheimer's which we can't find any sort of
genetic link. It happens and we have no idea
why. So there are 3 different classes. In terms
of if we are able to cure any of
these, we should be able to cure the ones
where we actually can point to the cause and
say that gene is mutated and we should be
able to cure this with certainty. It turns out
that that gene is a gene for a protein
called amyloid. And going back to the early 1900s,
Alzheimer's himself, Dr. Alzheimer, he identified that in the
brains of individuals with Alzheimer's, their brains are full
of these clumps of protein. Later we figured out
those are clumps of amyloid. And so when researchers
made the discovery in Carolle Jennings' family that these,
that that not only they already knew that these
clumps of protein exist in the patients with Alzheimer's,
when they discovered in her family that the mutation
in this protein caused the disease. They reasoned that
those clumps of protein must be toxic. So the
idea was it's the accumulation of those toxic clumps
that then triggers the neurodegeneration that then triggers the
cognitive decline associated with Alzheimer's. So this became the
amyloid hypothesis and It has to be something wrong
with Alzheimer's, at least in families like Carol's, right?
So, and what I think of is just an
absolute heroic efforts, right? And just like a sure
tour de force, researchers came up with drugs to
clear these amyloid plaques from the brain. It's remarkable
that they were able to do it, and those
drugs have been just approved in the last few
years. So that's remarkable. The tragic end to the
story so far is that they don't actually slow
the cognitive decline, at least to the way that
everyone would hope that they would, even in families
like Carol's where we know that amyloid causes the
disease. So, so they do slow it, but It's
in a in a disease that's that's thought to
last around 8 to 12 years, it might extend
the course of the disease, slow it down by
8 months. So you can see they're not the
magic bullet that we're hoping for. And so the
new idea is that it's, it's might be that
those drugs were given too late. It might still
be that Alzheimer's triggers events, but it might be
that once those events are triggered, you can't stop.
You know, they're just like the beginning of a
big domino chain or a big cascade, and then
once, once things have started, you, you can't slow
it down by just going back to that original
cause. That's kind of the current thinking behind Alzheimer's
right now. Some individuals think it's another protein called
tau that maybe is accumulating, and that's the problem.
Other individuals are really starting to embrace this idea
of the brain as a big complex dynamic system
of the type I'm talking about that would cause
something like a triggering cause, causes this huge kind
of cascade, including the originators of the original hypothesis,
this amyloid hypothesis, and an individual who actually made
the discovery about Carol's family. His name is John
Hardy, and he's in the UK. So why haven't
we been made more progress with Alzheimer's? Nobody really
knows, but I, but the suspicions I've just conveyed,
I think, are the current suspicions that it's not
as simple as find the broken domino in the
chain and target for, target it for a fix.
That's clear. At least we've been targeting the wrong
domino minimally, but yeah, what the right answer is
going to be is still unclear.
So when it comes to uncovering the causes behind
brain dysfunction and how to treat it, how does
this new approach based on the brain as a
complex dynamic system change how researchers go about finding
those causes of brain dysfunction?
Um, Yeah, I mean there there are a couple
of different things. I would say. One is that
it's something I said before, but it's really hard
to puzzle through these complicated systems, and so I
think there's a much more, a much larger emphasis
on creating models of the system as opposed to
just trying to intuit how things work. Another big
change is that the parts of a complex dynamical
system because of these big feedback loops, they interact,
and that's what gives rise to their kind of
surprising emergent properties. But what that means is you
can't study the parts one at a time. You
have to study them all at the same time,
and so it really changes the measurements that we
make. So flipping it on its head, being a
little bit more systematic about it, we have to
change how we measure things. We have to measure
everything at the same time. And so what does
that mean? Instead of measuring one thing across many
different individuals, we need to measure a lot of
things about the same individuals, right, in order to
really understand the causes of many of these disorders.
So that's measurement. We also want to make models
of these systems so we can Puzzle through the
what's going wrong, and we also want to use
those models to puzzle through how can we meaningfully,
once we figure out what's going wrong, how do
we meaningfully shift the system back to health. And
in engineering, they would call that a control problem
and control in complex dynamical systems, we know it
is very difficult. So yeah, it changes every step
of the scientific process, right? It makes, it makes
the whole process much more computational, much more mathematical,
but we have to change every step measurement, description,
and modeling and control. We have to change how
we think about it. Fortunately, all of these things
I'm talking about are not. It's this, so I
want to emphasize, when I wrote Elusive Cures, this
isn't about me, you know, coming in and swooping
in as some genius, right, telling everyone how to
fix these things. What I was really doing in
Elusive Cures was tapping into the genius of this
era that's already happening. And all the shifts of
all the technologies of all the things that brain
researchers are trying out, I could really see how
this particular shift amongst a community who's already doing
these things was really going to matter for this
end goal of of of societally impacts to society
that will be actually meaningful and beneficial. And so
these changes are already happening and it's really, really
exciting.
And how do we determine causality then within the
framework you present in the book and perhaps as
a sort of illustrative example, tell us about causality
in the case of opioid dependence and addiction.
Yeah, so when you have a domino chain, causality
is pretty straightforward, right? Causes lead to effects, there's
some cause that's broken, right? Go and find a
broken domino and fix it. Causality is not so
straightforward when you have these big feedback loops, right?
So you have causes to effects that feedback, the
time lags, and so even the notion of of
of cause and effect really starts to break down.
And you also have this additional complication that we
have this notion of levels of complexity or levels
of organization, right? So we know that genes encode
the stuff that brain cells are made up of
and the brain activity is what gives rise to
the functions of our brains. So we have these
different levels. So in the case of opioid dependence,
you could think about its causes in a lot
of different ways, and it really depends on who
you ask. So if you asked a brain researcher
what causes opioid dependence and addiction, they'll talk about
how the opioids, especially the synthetic opioids like fentanyl,
they're hijacking the brain circuits and they're leading those
motivational drug seeking circuits toward drugs. But if you
talk to a geneticist, they'll say, but that's not
quite right because there's a genetic predisposition. It's about
50% of opioid addiction and dependence depends on the
genes that you inherit. And if you ask someone
like a social worker, they'll say no, it's about
poverty and trauma and experience that then lead to
opioid dependence and addiction. And in the US, where
we're experiencing the opioid epidemic epidemic where we've seen
deaths due to overdose increase 7.5fold since 2000, that's
really tragic. Lawyers will point to the pharmaceutical industry
and say, you know, no, it's because those increases
are because they were pushing drugs. The pharmaceutical industries
were pushing drugs in the hunt for profits, right?
So you have all these different ways of enumerating
the causes of opioid dependence and addiction, and one
of the big questions is how do all these
causes fit together? Should we think about them as
they're linked across different levels? It's like a one
cause, but that doesn't seem quite right. Um, SO
researchers, uh, In the US who have focused on
trying to really target the opioid epidemic. HAVE started
to build these complex dynamical systems models which try
to not exactly all the causes I listed, but
they try to build causes, they try to build
models of what's happening within a community and use
those models in order to develop therapeutic interventions. So
those models will include things like the rate at
which individuals who are prescribed an opioid will actually
become dependent or addicted. Also, Individuals who are coming
in dependence and addiction from exposure on the street,
traumatic events that happen to them, the rate of
relapse and recovery under these different scenarios where they
have different access to different types of interventions, and
they use these big complex models in order to
tease apart what types of interventions could we use
to actually achieve a certain end goal which might
be twofold decrease in deaths within, say, say 3
years. And the tragic story behind behind a lot
of this work is that the amount of intervention
that would be required for these models is a
huge astronomical investment in terms of how many therapists
we would need and how many, given, given what
we have access to, but at least it helps
us point in the right direction, right? It helps
us. Not try to invest in, in, in things
that won't work, and it really kind of, I
think, um solidifies, quantifies what what needs to be
done so we can meaningfully do it, um, yeah,
teasing together these causes.
And so within this new framework, how do we
go from understanding brain dysfunction to developing cures and
treatments?
Yeah, that's a, that's a really good question. I
would say there are 22 primary ways. One is
the, it's kind of the equivalent of the classic
bench to bedside story. So we want to understand
a brain function in a lot of detail. We
want to build really complicated models of it, and
we want to infer from those models what's causing
the dysfunction. And how do we treat it? And
so this is an approach that has been quite
successful for certain types of cancer like leukemia, where
there's a form of leukemia that is controlled. It's
this very complicated genetic network. So there are 60
genes and they're all connected together in 140 different
ways, and it's impossible to just look at this
network and say, oh yeah, that's what's causing the
leukemia. But what researchers can do when they have
a big complex dynamical systems model like that when
they've modeled the whole thing is they can then
go through what's called a process of model reduction
and so they can take out of the model
the things that don't matter for cancer, leaving behind
a more simple model that they can, they can
tease apart and then infer how to treat and
how to stop it. So that's one approach. THAT
the brain is really, really complicated. It has 86
billion neurons in it. And so, you know, we're
not going to be able to model it in
all of its detail, but we can get pretty
detailed models of things, right, in terms of certain
things and focus on the levels that we think
matter. So that's one form is model in great
detail, reduce those models to figure out the causes,
and then target those causes for a treatment. And
that approach has also been taken in Parkinson's disease
in exciting ways where it's really embracing the complexity
of a big, complex dynamical system and then trying
to figure out how to treat it. There's another
way, another approach, and it's more akin to the
serendipitous approach, and that is based on partial knowledge
of how something works. Take your best guess at
what How we might influence the system to change
it from disordered to a more ordered state and
let's try and I think we want to do
this too because individuals out there are suffering, right?
They're suffering from conditions and so we need to
give some of these things a try, even in
the absence of these, this really complete. Kind of
detail. So I would say those are the two
parallel um processes uh that, that, that can go
from understanding to, to treatments.
Mhm. In the, at the beginning of our conversation,
we talked about the plan. So what is the
new grand plan then?
The new grand plan, yeah, so, so is it
that the grand plan of the 1990s was, it's
very pithy, right? So it's, if you think about
the brain as a domino chain, it would be
find the broken domino and fix it. That would
be the grand plan of the 1990s. So when
you get these more complex systems, then the grand
plan becomes less pithy. It's, it's a lot less
simple, but I would argue it is understand the
brain is a complex adaptive system. And then create
models to infer how it works, how it becomes
dysfunctional, and how to intervene to shift the system
from Uh, a condition, uh, a less healthy condition
to a more healthy one. So I would say
that that is the new emerging grand plan.
And how do you look then at the future
of brain research? Are you optimistic about it?
I'm unequivocally optimistic, and I'll I'll just share that
part of what really motivated me to write Elusive
Cures was pessimism, right? I just didn't understand, even
though I was in the field for 2020 years,
I didn't understand how the research That my community
was doing would translate to the societal end goals,
and that left me frustrated and because I couldn't
pinpoint it, right, it just left me with this
pessimism. If I can't see the through line, then
it's really hard for me to be optimistic that
there's one there. On the other side of writing
Elusive gear, so this process of writing it, right,
really created required me to zoom out and think
about brain and mind research as a whole and
all the brain's functions and its dysfunctions. And it
really changed the way I think about the type
of thing that the brain is, but I now
can very clearly describe why the brain is so
complicated, why we've had such a hard time with
these certain classes of disorders, and moreover, I can
describe what it is that we're going to do
about it. And one of the big developments that's
leading to my community thinking about the brain this
way as a complex adaptive system as opposed to
a domino chain, it's really about the development of
new technology, and it's two types of technology. One
is biotechnology. So I mentioned earlier to study a
complex system, you have to measure everything at the
same time. 20 years ago when I was recording
from neurons as a trainee, I could record from
one or two neurons at a time. Today we
can record from a million neurons at the same
time in a mouse, and that allows us to
make measurements we've never been able to make before.
So that's one big revolution. So changes in what
we can measure. But also the emergence of AI
has been a game changer. So for the first
time in history we can actually fit models that
are brainlike. So a long time ago we had
limited computational power. We had limited ability to build
these models. And so we could just deal with
little toy kind of illustrations of what the brain
might be a little bit like, but nothing that
rivaled the complexity of the brain. And now with
AI we can actually train models to do brain-like
things, and that's leading us to new insights into
how these brain-like things can actually manifest. And it's
just a whole different conceptual way of thinking about
the brain. So yeah, unequivocally optimistic about, about the
future of Brain research to really help contribute and
dissolve these disconnections between what we're discovering and these
kind of most formidable disorders. We won't know until
we know and so of course we can't make
any promises, but I for one. Very optimistic and
it's, it's also what's led me to be so
excited about what's happening. I want to redirect my
entire research program from studying memory to studying mood
where I see there's this huge unmet need and
I think we're finally ready for the first time
in history to tackle it. So I'm very excited.
Just one last question then, since we are in
the age of artificial intelligence, do you think that
it can play an important role here?
Absolutely, hands down, but perhaps not in the way
that um some are trying to sell it. So
I don't think that we're going to develop artificial
scientists that and in the book I described, you
know, where we say, OK, we hit the button
and we say go, go cure depression, and then
all the brain researchers go to the beach and
we come back a few hours later, and then
we look at, you know, the AI's cure depression
for us. I don't think it's going to be
like that at all. Um, RIGHT now, AI is
offering two things to the brain research community, and
there are two really important things. The first are
tools. We have tools that we've never had before,
and they include things like um there's an AI
called Alphafold, which can tell us about the three
dimensional structures of proteins given their DNA sequences. We've
never had that before. And so AI can finally
offer this to us. And once you know the
three dimensional structure of a protein, that can help
you develop a drug in order to target it
and so on. So that's an example of a
tool. Another example of tools are image processing. So
we're really interested in how the detailed connectivity of
the brain, we can take pictures of it, and
AI can analyze those pictures and reconstruct this three
dimensional structure of how the brain is all connected
together. So that's a pile of tools, and those
are tools we've never had before, and they just
speed up the discovery process enormously, enormously, because before
we had people who had to, like, you know,
make all of those inferences or reconstruct those proteins.
It took years. Now in AI, it takes some
seconds, which is like, so everything is just being
sped up. So that's one way tools. And another
is what I mentioned. AI is allowing us to
create these models that are brain-like that we've never
had before. And once we have those models, we
can infer how intelligence, how brains, how language works.
We can extract principles that we've never had before.
So AI is very much contributing in these two
ways at the same time. I'm a little bit
dubious that we're going to replace scientists anytime soon,
right? So I think scientists are using these things
as tools, and humans are still very much in
the loop, and I see them being in the
loop in an important way very much in the
future. But AI is game changing in terms of
the tools that are facilitating scientific discovery. Yeah, absolutely.
Great, so the book is again Elusive Cures Why
Neuroscience Hasn't solved Brain Disorders and How We Can
Change that. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Nicole, just before
we go, apart from the book, where can people
find your work on the internet?
Yeah, you could go to my website, Nicole Crust.com.
Um, SO I have summaries of everything there as
well as, uh, when that will link you to,
to other things I do like my, my lab
at the University of Pennsylvania.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to
talk with you. Oh, thank you so much, Ricardo.
It's been a, it's been a great conversation. I
appreciate it. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kaniz and Rosie. Thank
you for all.